The Fil-C Manifesto: Garbage In, Memory Safety Out!

The C and C++ programming languages are wonderful. There is a ton of amazing code written in both of them. But C and C++ are unsafe languages. Simple logic errors may result in an attacker controlling where a pointer points and what is written into it, which leads to an easy path to exploitation. Lots of other languages (Rust, Java, Haskell, even JavaScript) don't have this problem!

But I love C. And I love C++ almost as much. I grew up on them. It's such a joy for me to use both of them! Therefore, in my spare time, I decided to make my own memory-safe C and C++. This is a personal project and an expression of my love for C.

Fil-C introduces memory safety at the core of C and C++:

All pointers carry a capability, which tracks the bounds and type of the pointed-to memory. Fil-C use a novel pointer encoding called InvisiCap, where each 64-bit pointer in memory has a corresponding capability, stored in an invisible part of the address space. The InvisiCap algorithm allows Fil-C to find the capability quickly whenever a pointer is loaded, and to replace the capability efficiently (and atomically if needed) when a pointer is stored. Pointers in flight (i.e. pointers being passed around in registers) utilize two registers; one for the pointer and one for the capability. The capability contains the lower and upper bounds, type information for special objects like functions, and everything needed to locate the invisible capabilities for any pointers stored in that object. Accessing memory causes a bounds check, and for pointer accesses, additional logic to access the capability.

All allocations are garbage collected using FUGC (Fil's Unbelievable Garbage Collector). FUGC is a concurrent, real time, accurate garbage collector. Threads are never suspended for GC. Freeing an object causes its capability to have zero bounds, which prevents all future access. FUGC will redirect all object pointers to free objects to the free singleton object, which ensures that freed objects are definitely collected on the next cycle. Accessing a freed object before or after the next GC is guaranted to trap. Also, freeing objects is optional.

The combination of InvisiCaps and FUGC means that it's not necessary to instrument or change malloc and free calls; the semantics are compatible with C. It's also not necessary to change unions. It's even possible to have int-ptr unions and to ping-pong between using the int and ptr members.

The combination of InvisiCaps and FUGC means that pointer capabilities cannot be forged. Your program may have logic errors (bad casts, bogus pointer arithmetic, races, bad frees, use-after-free, whatever) but every pointer will remember the bounds and type of the thing it originated from. If you break that pointer's rules by trying to access out-of-bounds, or read an int as a pointer or vice-versa, or access a freed object, Fil-C will thwart your program's further execution.

Fil-C supports tricky features like pthreads, signal handlers, mmap, C++ exceptions (which implies libunwind), and setjmp/longjmp. All of these features are memory-safe. Because Fil-C pointers support atomics, lock-free algorithms using pointers work just fine. Pointer races on pointers not marked _Atomic or volatile lead to Fil-C panics, at worst. It's even possible to allocate memory using malloc from within a signal handler (which is necessary because Fil-C heap-allocates stack allocations).

Fil-C's protections are designed to be comprehensive. There's no escape hatch short of delightful hacks that also break all memory-safe languages. There's no unsafe keyword. Even data races result in memory-safe outcomes. Fil-C operates on the GIMSO principle: Garbage In, Memory Safety Out! No program accepted by the Fil-C compiler can possibly go on to escape out of the Fil-C type system. At worst, the program's execution will be thwarted at runtime by Fil-C.

Quick links:

Work-in-progress document describing Fil-C's GIMSO semantics.

Examples of Fil-C catching memory safety issues.

Releases (Linux/X86_64 binaries).

Fil-C is already powerful enough to run a memory-safe curl and a memory-safe OpenSSH (both client and server) on top of a memory-safe OpenSSL, memory-safe zlib, memory-safe pcre (which required no changes), memory-safe CPython (which required some changes and even found a bug), memory-safe SQLite, memory-safe libcxx and libcxxabi, memory-safe musl (Fil-C's current libc), memory-safe ICU, as well as other programs (the list is growing all the time).

Thanks to the flexibility of InvisiCaps, most programs compile and run with zero changes. Even sophisticated programs like Lua and OpenSSH require zero code changes to work!